We're going to jump into our next set of
frontier talks. The first is which from
Naveen Rao. Naveen is a pioneer in the
AI space. He did his PhD in
neuroscience. Then he started one of the
first ever AI chip companies way before
it was cool. He's actually the person
who ran Mosaic ML, one of the first AI
training companies, and then built all
of Data Bricks AI. He left that amazing
role to do something new and redefine
the future of computing bringing cool
back to neuroscience. Naveen, come on
up.
>> [applause]
>> All right. Afternoon everyone. Yeah,
super excited to be here. I'm Naveen Rao
and CEO of Unconventional AI. So we are
unconventional because maybe it's
actually the wrong word to use cuz I
think we're going to change the name to
conventional. It's a actually a great
time to be a startup as as Boris alluded
Boris alluded to, right? Like having no
baggage actually I think is a true
competitive advantage. We can do things
so much faster than traditional
you know, sort of chip companies and
full stack companies can do. And I think
that's what's very exciting. We can get
to tape outs in months instead of years,
things like this. So anyway, let's get
get started.
I put that up there. I can guarantee you
some of you are like trying to prove me
wrong. All of a sudden you're like, oh
my god, what's you know, I can hear the
I can hear the gears turning like that
that that can't be true. Well, let me
let me explain my logic a little bit and
uh and and maybe the definition of what
I call ASI. So
really I think we need to get to much
greater amount of computer efficiency.
And when I say computer efficiency, I
don't mean algorithmic computer
efficiency or data efficiency. There's
lots of people working on these
problems. I actually mean the
fundamental substrate. Actually how I do
information processing at the like
physics level.
We chose a path of making computers work
the way they did for a lot of reasons
about 80 years ago. If you think about
it, like in the tech industry, how many
things have existed for 80 years? Like
not a lot. The digital abstraction sort
of floating point numbers, those were
around from from the 1940s. And for
machine that was built from a
completely different substrate and for a
machine that was built for completely
different purpose. And now we're
building machines for intelligence. So
let's think through this a little bit.
So part of this is that AI will make us
more efficient. I mean, we've talked
about coding and you know, running a
thousand agents on your phone, all this
kind of stuff, right? It does make us
more efficient. But at some point we
start to get to a place where what what
what is efficiency really mean? If you
think about energy, actual energy, maybe
we're actually not more efficient. And
we're kind of budding up against those
limitations of the physical world now.
Um you know, already today we're we're
using many gigawatts for AI inference
and training. And we're going to get to
a point within the next couple of years.
This is not 10 years away. This is two,
three, four years where we just don't
have any more energy in the world for
AI. Then this topic starts to become
very very important. Right now you can
kind of look at it like, well
electrical energy versus like food.
These are two energy sources for
intelligence.
Um and you know, there's no real
limitation on the on the electrical
side, but that's going to hit a pretty
solid wall very soon. And you know,
we're talking about going to space,
we're talking about building fusion
reactors. Great. Let's do all those
things, but still these fundamental
physics apply.
So
if we think through this a little bit,
we have about 8 billion people in the
world. Our brains use about 20 watts
each. That's only 160 gigawatts. So the
entirety of humanity is 160 gigawatts.
So just put that into comparison, we
have about 9,000 gigawatts of capacity
in the world today. The US has about a
thousand.
And you know, this runs everything. This
is like heating in your home and you
know, all the things, electric cars, all
that kind of stuff. But if we said we
you know, maybe you got 50% more of this
and we say okay, great. Now we got like,
you know, 4,000 plus gigawatts. But the
problem is our current [clears throat]
paradigm of compute is just vastly more
inefficient. So a computer I'm I'm
making some numbers up here. I mean, I
can say like if I'm running inference
per token, I can come up with numbers,
but you know, fully loaded like the
amount of energy that goes into
inference, building the model, running
the model, all of that. Let's call it a
gigawatt, something like that or you
know, definitely in the megawatt range.
But humans are on the order of of 20
watts. And you could also argue that
evolution over 4 billion years has
created what we are. But the reality is
today our constraint becomes how quickly
can we get learnings happen? How quickly
can we build intelligence on a given
amount of energy?
So
if we want to build this future where we
have lots of intelligence in the world
and we're automating all kinds of things
that we want to really be more efficient
from an energy standpoint, we're we're
going to need a lot more we're going to
need a lot more watts.
Or we can think about building a vastly
more power efficient computer. And
that's where we come in.
So I love this curve here and I think
most people really haven't really
haven't thought about this cuz you just
sort of assume the computer is a
computer. And we haven't really
questioned that. Again, this is the
unconventional part is like, let's break
that apart. The
the assumptions we made 80 years ago are
actually not quite valid anymore. We
just choose to keep building on them
because I can build a product in two
years. I can make something that I can
sell in two years. But we're kind of
taking a different tax like, let's go
back to those first principles and see
if we can build something much much
better.
So there is a thermodynamic limit to
intelligence per watt. Okay, that means
you just can't do any better. There's
there's something called the Landauer
principle which some of you may know,
which basically suggests how much
compute could happen within a certain
amount of energy. So there is a physical
reality that we can't we can't get past
and that's sort of this asymptote here.
Now biology is somewhere up here. It's
actually pretty darn efficient.
4 billion years of evolution have
created something that is actually very
efficient. However, it's not at the
asymptote yet. There's probably an order
of two of magnitude between those two.
We're actually here by the way. We're
we're down here. And I think limits of
2D lithography, that's what chips are
built on today is call it somewhere down
here.
And I think with focused effort we can
get to the point where we're pushing the
limit of that.
And so we'll have something that's this
is this by the way is something like
three orders of magnitude from where we
are. It is very far away from where we
where we could be in terms of energy
efficiency. And so really that's what
we're focused on today.
So how do we do it? I mean, yeah, this
is great. Make something more power
efficient and wonderful, right? But the
reality is we it's not so simple. We
can't be thinking about the computer in
exactly the same way as we have been.
It's not about a machine that runs off
of runs matrix math. That's been the
simple way to move forward. Nvidia of
course has owned that market and
continue to push the envelope. But if
you look at the power efficiency
numbers, actual power efficiency of
delivering an FP8 flop for instance,
it's not that much better. Costs have
gotten better cuz manufacturing's gotten
better, our ability to package has
gotten better, but actual energy per
flop with memory access has not gotten
better. It's very very incremental now.
So I am a
a neuroscientist. I was a computer
architect for 10 years before that. So
I've been thinking about this problem
for a long time, actually on the order
of 30 years. So it's a very exciting
time for me personally. And you know
biology really does provide an existence
proof. I mean, you can argue that okay,
the tokens per second out of a human are
lower than a machine, but the
intelligence is higher. We still haven't
gotten to the point with these gigawatts
that we're throwing at it that we're
we're rivaling a human's intelligence in
terms of discovery. We'll get there.
We're going to get there in a very short
amount of time. But it's going to come
at the cost of a lot of energy.
So what I think is most interesting here
is actually not just
that brains are human brains are 20
watts, but that the watt is kind of
scales with the with the weight. A
macaque monkey's brain is probably less
than a watt. And actually you see this
all through the mammalian world and I've
also the insect world. Like you have
very complex behavior for milliwatts.
Just for reference, your phone in your
pocket is about one watt. So you know, a
squirrel jumping from branch to branch
is running on a less than 10 milliwatts.
That's 1/100 of your phone. We can't
actually do this perfectly. Like
a squirrel's jumping 10 feet across from
branch to branch within wind and all
that stuff. We can't do that with a much
much larger computer. So biology still
created something quite amazing. And I
just I just don't feel like there's been
an appreciation for that. So I'm just
you know, just just just a little
reminder there. So now
great. We we see this kind of
phenomenologically like
biology is efficient can do can do
amazing things, but how does it actually
work? We don't really know. I will be
honest as a computer scientist and a
neuroscientist, but there are some ideas
that we can harvest from neuroscience.
And one of them is that the brain is
dynamic. It does not use matrix math to
do compute. It uses what's called
non-linear dynamics to do compute. What
this means is that there's a time
varying
interaction between neurons and that's
actually where the compute lies. So can
we extract that and actually apply it to
to synthetic circuits? Maybe.
They don't do floating point math. They
don't do matrix math. They do something
that can be characterized as such, but
it's actually much richer than that
because of these non-linear dynamics.
And they're stochastic. Brain's compute
is not a strict one and zero. In a
digital computer, if we're off by a one
or zero, the whole system falls apart.
So they're really not computers. So I'm
going to try to go through this quickly.
This is a thing called a Kuramoto
synchronization. So if you look at a
bunch of oscillators here and they're
kind of rigidly
coupled to each other on this plank, you
know, you'll see over time that
they start off in any state and then
they actually synchronize. This is an
example of a of a of a contracting or or
or converging dynamical system. So no
matter how you start it, it converges
and it's only based upon the coupling
between them. We can generalize this to
something that has kind of a flexible
coupling, call it a trainable coupling
between those those things. And then it
can have all kinds of interesting
dynamics. It can move through the state
space of dynamics in many, many
different ways.
So, if you generalize this, you can
actually think about an electrified
electronic circuit. You can say I have a
bunch of oscillators and they have a
fabric on which they're coupled. And now
when I when I make this fabric
trainable, I can actually see something
that's it starts to look a little little
bit more like the dynamics of the brain.
It actually has nonlinearities and they
interact with each other in very
interesting ways. It's actually very
rich represent a lot of information.
This is actual uh chip that we're going
to be building this summer. So, we went
from basically no team in January to a
to a full prototype in 6 months and
that's because of AI. So, this is what's
really cool about not having baggage is
you can do things in completely
different ways.
And the way you compute with something
like this is the traditional way would
be basically loop over some sort of
linearized time. This is how we do
things in a in a von Neumann machine. We
write state out, we retrieve it, we
operate on it, we write it back. So, we
keep going back and forth. Turns out
that's what burns most of the energy in
an existing computing system.
With something with nonlinear dynamics,
I actually just say, "Here's the initial
state, kick it and let it run." So, the
the physics themselves basically do this
computation and it does it sort of the
the state is an implicit. It's not an
explicit right.
So, in some ways you can think about it
if you take anything from this talk that
we use the time the time access of the
physics to do computing and existing
computing constructs do not.
And so, the question then is, "Can I
train this?" And the answer is yes. Um I
can actually steer the system into
multiple multiple different things. In
fact, we've sort of traced out in state
space a unconventional logo. That's the
idea here and we can train it in a few
different ways. So, yes, we can train
these systems and steer them into
basically any arbitrary set of
trajectories.
And can we compute uh can we connect it
to AI problems like uh image generation?
So, actually I have a better version of
this I can go to in a just a really
quick demo here.
Uh let's go to the next one.
We'll go to the demo.
Yeah, so basically what you see here is
uh something that's running on a on a
model of dynamics that was trained on
these different images. So, basically I
can say, "Okay, I have to use cats." I
think Andrew Ng is here. So,
>> [laughter]
>> homage to him, but we can do anything.
But basically this is a pretty simple
generative model. And I can basically
say like, "Okay, at time t equals 1, I'm
going to I'm going to backprop an error
um from randomness to to a particular
image class." And after that point, we
let the we let the system just run
naturally. And you what you'll find is
that it actually has clumped its
representation into places that are
meaningful. They're no longer just
random
pixels, but they're actually pixel
pixels that make different kind of
machine or different kind of animals or
whatever. So, for horses, I start off as
random and at t equals 1, you should see
it kind of converge into horse-like
things.
And then over time you'll actually see
it sort of morph between those. So, it's
already learned in the state space that
I can move between these different
things.
So, let's go ahead and move out of this.
So, this is really the emergence of
something new. So, CPUs actually do um
very fast single-threaded things the
best. Even today, uh it's faster than a
GPU. And really what you're doing is
this kind of von Neumann machine where
you're moving in and out of uh memory
and cache and doing operations. GPU
basically do this with multiple operands
at once. So, you move a bunch of
operands from memory, do some stuff to
it, write it back.
Compute in memory like Groq sort of did
the same thing, but just did it on chip.
It's kind of a a more fine-grained
version of this.
Now, what we're talking about is doing
something in a dynamical system. The
state and the the function are
overlapped with the physics themselves.
So, you now have no separation between
state and computation.
And you know, compute efficiency goes
goes up, of course, galaxy braininess
goes up. And uh this is truly non-von
Neumann.
So, with that, I'm just going to leave
you with this quote. It's been something
I've guided my entire life by and I'm
I'm really excited about this time
because I've been thinking about this
problem for 30 years. And we're at this
point where I think we can actually
start to understand how brains work cuz
now we can build them. Thank you.
>> [applause]